thank you
[Music]
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler and
I'm here again with Joe Hudson
what is love we all have a felt sense of
love and opinions around what it is
how do our feelings and ideas around
love get formed what happens when our
experience of Love gets confused with
our complex past and how can we unwind
our conditioning and open up to the
deepest richest love available to us
this is what we'll explore in today's
episode
Good morning Joe good morning Brett how
are you man oh man I feel like I got hit
by a truck uh we just did groundbreakers
last week and as always
afterwards just being in the space with
everybody's process and everybody's
emotions and
myself doing more and more of this work
and just recognizing how sensitive my
body is to what's going on in the room
around me I come out of it and I'm just
like like my body just needs to
needs to move some stuff
yeah it's it's a lot holding holding
that space and then you know coming back
into my own weak uh having having been
away from a lot of other stuff and
having having catch up to do
yeah what's amazing to me is that the I
mean it's not amazing but the folks who
leave groundbreakers are
stoked happy loving refreshed revived
and then and everybody's facilitated is
like just gonna Drool on themselves for
two days and recover
scattered as interesting
thing yeah I'm I I'm feeling pretty
recovered now but I definitely had two
days of doing absolutely nothing which I
think is the key yeah well I came right
out of it and uh found out about a death
in the family so
another another load of things hitting
my system and it's really really brought
up for me
you know as I'm as I'm planning my
travel you know back to this funeral
and reflecting uh it's having me just
reflect on a lot of what what this work
is is how we we bring ourselves back to
unconditional love you know view is one
of the ways you've described the view
state of being
is to be an unconditional love yeah and
I'm really curious to explore uh sort of
the assumptions under underneath what
each of us might think love is
you know one of the things that happens
when people come into a groundbreakers
is that they they start to recognize oh
I I thought love was sacrifice
you know I thought
yeah
I thought love was abuse I thought love
was you know tough love really just like
pushing somebody and or being pushed and
so there's just all these different ways
that we
that we've come to recognize what we
believe love to be and to say that we
everybody I think everybody wants to be
loved and to be loving
and
there's just many different
beliefs around what that actually means
yeah what's interesting to me too is
that there's also the there's The
Logical belief and then there's the
somatic belief system
and so you you just said something like
some people think love is abuse and I
think most people intellectually would
be like no it isn't right and
and yet you see it all the time where
somebody
has abusive love relationships and so
they're recreating that abuse or like in
a groundbreakers when they're
overwhelmed with like this tremendous
love that they haven't felt before
they'll literally say something like I
don't understand why I think someone's
gonna hit me or or you know or wow I
feel like I should be hit right now
because they've they've had that kind of
abuse in their life
um so there's yes we get love confused
not only intellectually but also in the
body our body
does that and and so for me that what I
see here is that you know that classic
saying of that which wires together
fires together what I notice is that the
the love that was
uh shown like what we are kids and we
love our parents
whether and I don't care what happens to
you I don't care if you hate your
parents you know you end up loving your
parents they they the kid who was like
deeply abused by a parent still on some
level wants the love and affection of
their parent they want that relationship
healed they want
um they want closure or they want to be
seen by the parent and even if they've
given up on it there's still something
in all of us that wants that it's
hardwired and so hardwired right and so
we're hardwired for this and so whatever
relationship we've had with our parents
or our caregivers in those Early Times
whatever that is that gets wired with
the love this is what I think love is so
if my parents are really critical then
it's like oh right criticism is part of
the experience of love if my parents
were abusive abuse is part of the
experience of love if my
parents are avoidant then avoidance is
part of the experience of love and we go
about
finding that experience over and over
again recreating that experience over
and over again knowing love to be that
experience over and over again
and it isn't until somebody really stops
and says what what's the love that I
really wanted that they can get in touch
with the like the deeper levels of Love
yeah
yeah yeah so and sort of the the
justifications are often if I don't
you know if I'm not critical with my kid
the world will be more critical I'm
protecting them from something oh yeah
right yeah great justifications for all
of it
my parents did it and so I I was I
turned out just fine yeah
if you're just just on the on that note
if you're saying I did it my parents did
it and I turned out just fine I can
guarantee you that's not true
yeah yeah exactly if you have to say
that it means you're protecting
something that was hurt I guarantee it
so if you if you're listening to this
and you've said that that's a really
good marker for a part of yourself that
you've been hurt that has been hurt that
you haven't addressed yeah
okay so let's let's look more into this
so
uh we we grew up we naturally love our
parents we want their love we need
connection to survive and so we just end
up our bodies Our emotions and our
thoughts get conditioned
from whatever love was available to us
or whatever connection was available and
we just assume that that's love
and then that becomes the way that we
experience expect look for it in the
rest of our lives what are some of the
Practical implications of of this
phenomenon it will one is when somebody
says oh you should love that part of
yourself or you should love yourself one
one of the basic ones is there they'll
say how do I do that you know that's
literally that
but um but the more the thing that
actually affects people's lives in a
real way is that we become attracted to
people who fulfill that concept of love
and
um we the things that we think we have
to do for love are are part of that is
like that's that's how it it's trained
us so what we learn love to be is what
is also our list of the things we think
we have to do for love
and it also is what tells us we have to
close down our heart
incorrectly but it tells us what we have
to close down our heart for
so the things that we think like oh
this is what love is if I don't do that
then I have to close down my heart and
we get a false false causation false
correlation
and all those things really screw up
relationships so the effect is like
really screwed up relationships through
because of these things yeah got it so
there were a couple of different points
that you mentioned there so let's go
into each of these and describe how they
play out the first one you mentioned is
what you're attracted to uh yeah yeah
how how love how your conception of Love
affects
what you're attracted to what who's
attracted to you and what you're looking
for
yeah so so I I cannot tell you how many
clients I've had who like part of what
they want to do in our work is to find
that relationship
and they'll just say well I can't
control what I'm attracted to
uh not in the short term maybe but
definitely in the long term and so
there's this this thing that like Sparks
us the thing that says oh wow here's
this person that I'm attracted to it's
it's typically because they play the
role that we had as a kid around love
and we've touched on this in different
ways in the podcast and I think I've
told the story but I can't remember but
I've had this great occasion to be able
to listen to people in their first dates
and I can literally tell you what the
patterns are going to be by listening to
the the unknown negotiation that they're
having with one another during and yeah
so
as an example
uh if you knew love to be
deeply critical which we just talked
about
then most likely you're gonna have
somebody your other the person that
you're loving is going to be highly
Critical with you
if you know or you're going to be
critical to them or both and so that's
that's how the system works is that we
whatever was wired with that love is
what we're going to be attracted to and
I and what I notice is that over time
my clients will often are the people who
take the courses will often change what
they're attracted to like that that
natural oh my gosh I'm attracted to that
person completely changes
because they have learned to create like
non-correlation non-space between
the idea of love and the idea of
what was wired in as love when they were
when they were young
and and that often requires a step of
not treating yourself that way so oh
this is love love is criticism therefore
I criticize myself a lot therefore I
criticize the people who I love a lot
and it's when they can start
separating criticism from love then
then yeah they stop it in themselves and
and that process can be quite scary
because
when they when you're separating the
criticism from yourself you're like oh
my gosh then I'm it's a very
subconscious thing but there's this fear
that oh I'm this is that I'm going to
have love pulled away from me
right that's the other way that it works
is that if it was wired like that if it
gets it turns away you're like oh Love's
Gonna Go With It
so I have to accept that yeah yeah yeah
if I if I don't accept if I don't take
criticism or accept criticism in my life
then
I won't receive love people will leave
me
because I got the most criticism and
attention and love and therefore what I
experienced as love when I was being
criticized and then so that that also
kind of interacts with a self-concept of
like let's say the self-concept might be
I need to be criticized or I need to be
pushed or I need somebody else to tell
me what's what's best yeah and I don't
feel like I'm getting my needs met if I
don't have somebody fulfilling that role
so then I would then that's that's how I
might recreate the patterns so that
somebody who's in relationship with me
finds themselves criticizing me because
I'm inviting it
yeah and I would say just like the
easier way to feel this for the anybody
who's listening is just
say to yourself out loud I I don't need
to accept criticism to be loved
and it many people who just said that to
themselves are immediately so go ahead
if you're listening and do that
and then you'll notice the thoughts that
arise oh wait no I can't people will
think I'm arrogant people will think I'm
I'm I'm I I'm not open to feedback
people will think blah blah blah you'll
have a thousand thoughts that justify
how will I improve criticism yeah
exactly
as if criticism is required for any of
that stuff right and then you'll hear
the thought yes criticism's absolutely
required for that stuff
and and so
feedback is but criticism isn't and so
it is literally that process of
getting to the point of seeing that
clearly oh yeah criticism in the body
and in the mind criticism is not
necessary
and and that will happen with anything
that you taught were taught love was
yeah I have to put up with somebody
leaving all the time to put up with
avoidance I have to put up with blah
blah blah blah
yeah so this is this was the piece
around what we're attracting and what
we're attracted to uh the next one that
you mentioned was what you have to do
for love the assumptions around what we
have to do to be loved yeah wired
together
yeah so that's what we're that's what
we're we've actually drifted into that
is like oh we have to accept that
criticism as an example of that
um
so so that one is
that that one's interesting because it's
it's also how we lose our power in a
relationship so
right for instance uh let's say there's
two people and they both date a jealous
person
the first person didn't learn the
jealousy was something or possessiveness
was something to be accepted and so it's
just like yeah no I'm not taking taking
that on forget it and it's just very
clean and simple and neither the person
meets them or doesn't meet them the
other person who was taught that they
were responsible for other people's
emotional states
and they say oh yeah I'm I will accept
this
um
this jealousy even though it sucks even
though I'm not saying the thing that I
want to say because I'm scared of the
jealousy even though uh it feels
horrible to be in this interaction with
this person and
in that they start losing their power
and then the attraction dies
so everything that we do to
get the love which is a false sense of
love to maintain the love which is a
false sense of Love erodes our power and
reduces the attraction in the
relationship
and so you see that all the time two
people who've been together for a while
the attraction's gone the sex is gone
because they're taking care of each
other because they think they have to
take care of each other in different
ways to maintain the love
and that is all based on a false sense
of Love yeah and by take care of you
mean sort of the caretaking like they're
they're they're taking responsibility
for the others emotion and
choosing believing that they need to
abandon themselves and their power in
order to receive love exactly that's
right yeah yeah
and so this is this is what creates the
dysfunction in the relationships this is
what creates the fights in the
relationship this is what creates the
loss of power in the relationship so the
way it creates the fights is
let's use that another example of
somebody who learned that their job was
to make sure that the person the other
person doesn't get mad right so they're
in a relationship where they think to
maintain love they have to make sure
that the other person doesn't get angry
and
when they're they'll be confronted at
some point where it's between doing what
they want to do and doing something that
might get that person angry and the
resentment starts building and that
resentment either becomes aggression or
passive aggression
and that starts tweaking the
relationship to a point where it fights
start occurring either whether they're
pacifieds or aggressive fights and and
the fights get stuck because the sort of
the The Meta process in the fight is
trying to minimize the other person's
anger rather than hearing them and being
with them and fully receiving them and
staying within oneself and one's needs
right and so then the communication
drops in the relationship it becomes a
management process rather than
a relationship or right
yeah a joining of yeah adjoining of two
wisdoms
yeah and and so right so this like
here's something you've never heard oh
my gosh I just met the most beautiful
person I'm totally in love with them
it's like I'm just awestruck by them
because they're gonna need a lot of my
management
like you never hear that you do
subconsciously
but then like a year later it says it's
constantly managing one another as an
example so yeah so and all that happens
because of that false sense of love that
that confused confused love yeah yeah
okay so another thing that you had
mentioned in the Practical implications
was that the way that we the way that we
perceive or assume love to be
can
determines where we will close our heart
can you say more on that
yeah so I'll give you a really great
story that's happened recently
um one of my clients uh was
um
questioning their marriage and
they were he was uh
just not being loving and I was and I
was calling attention to him like what's
going on and and what we discovered was
that he thought that he couldn't leave
and love them
because that would be disloyal that
would be
um it would be leading them on
and
as soon as he realized oh I can love
this person even if I leave I can love
this person the leaving I can love this
person in the stain I can love this
person that that's actually where my
freedom is is to love them
unconditionally you and that doesn't
loving unconditionally even that thought
process somebody who's listening to this
and
wait you can't leave somebody and love
them unconditionally right and
so as soon as
that person realized it they were able
to love
their wife in a in the way that was
actually really appealing it it fixed
the whole relationship that the the
thing that was was stopping the love was
the idea that I might leave the person
and therefore that was actually creating
the reality of leaving the person and as
soon as it was like oh I can love you
and I don't need to manage you
then the other person felt seen and
heard for the first time and started
relaxing and unfolding and being
vulnerable in the whole thing
yeah it was it wasn't it wasn't a like
overnight process by any strikes there
was there was months of work that came
out of it but all that work was
allowed because all of a sudden people
could
feel seen and heard and whatever was
happening for them whereas before that
they couldn't and therefore it wouldn't
work because there was that closed heart
so that's what it means it means
anything that you think you have to
close your heart for
like if I if I open my heart then I have
to stay with them if I open my heart
then I have to put up with the abuse if
I open my heart then I won't hold my
boundaries if I open my heart then I
won't
um I won't stand for the thing that's
important to me if I open my heart then
I won't be able to get my sexual desires
fulfilled whatever it is
that creates this closure of the heart
and then the that doesn't allow the
relationship to heal yeah it creates a
feeling of trappedness too yes exactly
yeah if you if you don't feel like you
can leave and be loving
and love yourself because it would be
bad for you not to be loving this person
in the way that you've been conditioned
to believe love is then all that's left
is to feel trapped
and that's a fear State and so now
you're bringing a whole bunch of fear
into where where love could be
yes and that shows up everywhere in the
relationship
yeah I you know we all want to be loving
and we all want to be loved and yet we
don't
and that's usually based on that
confusion of what love is
we often don't even see when we're being
loved I was having a conversation just
the other day with um
one of my clients uh a person that they
that they work with and
and the person was describing the
problems that they were having with my
client and
she kept on
saying like something to the effect of
like I know that sounds harsh and I kept
on saying no that sounds like compassion
now my client couldn't hear it
because because of their version of what
love is
and she this this woman I was talking to
she was in us in a situation where so
many people in the world had told her
that's not what love is but she was just
very direct very straightforward and
very clear about
how to be with somebody and it was it
was deeply compassionate it wasn't
it wasn't refined it wasn't skillful but
it was there was compassion behind it
and and that's the same thing that that
happens is that we
we have this
um idea of what love should be and
therefore we can't even see the love
that's coming at us
that like different different languages
of love yeah we're listening on the
wrong Channel yeah we're listening so we
feel like our life is Loveless or
lacking in love when we're just not
seeing what is available and we're
chasing
chasing something that's not really love
chasing something that comes with all
kinds of
other stuff fear threat control yeah the
experience is when you actually find the
real love
the experiences is it's everywhere all
the time and it's it's like the the it
it almost feels like it's creating the
entire reality it's an amazing thing
when you're like oh right
it's that it's the thing that's that's
like animating everything on some level
is the experience it's about experience
of it and and it's like wait how did I
ever chase this
when it's just there
yeah
so let's say let's say we're in one of
these Dynamics and we recognize this and
yeah
or some other some other Dynamic around
you know that that derives from our
assumptions of what love is how do we
how do we change it what's what's the
way out of the pattern
yeah that's a great question so Learning
To Love Yourself unconditionally is a
huge part of it
um
and the best pointer I can I can give
you there is to love yourself the way
you've always wanted to be loved
like literally go into a three-year-old
version of yourself
say how do I want to be loved how did I
want love then
and give that kind of love to yourself
it's a felt sense it's an experience so
that's one of the things the other thing
is to really allow the Heartbreak so
if I
like so because in that middle piece
that we talked about you feel trapped
where oh I'm gonna either lose the love
or I'm gonna have to sacrifice a part of
myself
and then I lose the power and then I get
in the fights etc etc at that moment the
choice is heartbreak
oh I might lose something that I love
if I'm myself
and I'm going to be myself and I'm gonna
let my heart break if I lose the thing
that I love and maybe that allows the
person to meet you in a different way
but it definitely makes it so the next
person you meet will be a different way
and you'll be attracted to something
very different
it's like 80 20 typically if someone's
really consistent about it eighty
percent the person will meet them 20
percent
they'll have to they'll have to you know
the relationship will end a new
relationship will begin
um so
so it's like allowing that heartbreak so
really when we say we feel stuck in a
relationship oh because if I they might
get angry I'm either gonna have to feel
fear or I'm gonna have to feel
heartbreak and beneath the fear that I
have to feel is is heartbreak so oh I
can't say that to the jealous person
because if I say that to the jealous
person they're gonna just go
crazy
right and and so maybe I'm scared
because they're going crazy
assuming they're not violent or anything
right they're going crazy maybe there's
some fear in me but underneath that fear
is this deep heartbreak of holy crap I
have been putting up with this and
they're in so much pain
is this deep heartbreak and sadness and
so allowing that every chance you
possibly can will increase your capacity
to love so every time our heart's broken
it increases our capacity to love
and then the other one is just to take
contrary
um action so today I was talking to one
of my clients and they were talking
about their
um their relationship with their mom and
what became really obvious is that the
mom was doing fear at the person right
like the way you can be angry at someone
they were being fear like they were
putting anxiety at the person so it was
like oh my God what am I going to do as
like will you hold some of my fear so
that I can feel better
and it was consistent and it was
ridiculous like but what I don't know
how to Google yeah you know how to
Google them all you know that kind of
thing and
um
and in that she
always was trying to make the fear
better because she learned at a young
age at making mom's fear go away or
caretaking mom's fear is part of what
love is
and so she was just caretaking it and
all of a sudden
when she's like all right right I can
have freedom what's the contrary action
that I can take here when she has fear
and I could just be like oh wow that's a
lot of fear mom or I could be like
oh my gosh and then what will happen
if you if you if you can't Google then
what's gonna happen like oh you like
play into it or like even like up the
ante the other way you call up her mom
and say oh my gosh I don't know what's
going to happen if you like get lost at
the airport on the way to see me or
whatever that is so
like it's like finding that flexibility
to act in a completely different way
is part of allowing yourself to see that
you're unstuck and that you can actually
be in love yeah so it seems like each of
these are different layers where there's
the taking the contrary action to the
pattern will bring you into the
Heartbreak because you're gonna end up
bumping up against the resistance and
the fear yeah also feeling the
Heartbreak opens up your capacity to
take those contrary actions because
you've felt through the those
consequences and all of this brings you
into the deeper unconditional love
because you can be with yourself you
could be with your partner you could
love your partner even if you're leaving
and
and then so the whole Space opens up and
one one curiosity that I have just that
listeners might be curious about when we
talk about feeling the Heartbreak fully
I feel like there's a
often in sort of the culture heartbreak
is considered something that breaks you
you know you have you've had a
heartbreak and now you're broken and you
have baggage and I just want to kind of
point out what what is this the
distinction between when we say feel the
Heartbreak all the way through and
uh a broken heart in the way that people
talk about it as something that's like
damaged yeah that's great so it's it's
the best metaphor I have is it and it
which is weird because I've never done
this but in childbirth Tara
stop calling contractions contractions
and she called them expansions because
that's what they're actually doing in
the body they're actually expanding
right and so she's like oh these are
expansions
and it totally changed the way she
related to childbirth similarly
heartbreak
feels like it's like a breaking apart
but it's actually a breaking open It's
actually an it's like the contraction
it's an expansion and it's just to
expand like just take a huge deep breath
in and then take a little more breath in
and take a little bit more breath in
there's like there's a pain to it right
there's like a little bit of a
discomfort that comes with it expansion
has that discomfort as well so
when I say heartbreak I'm I'm talking
about breaking open and what's
interesting is um I just recently heard
something that Neuroscience shows that
women compared to men in our society in
Western Society anyways
women are far more open to the
experience of heartbreak and therefore
they
will take the relationships like in the
early days of a relationship breaking
offer or ending they'll be a lot more in
their emotional patterns of it they'll
have a lot more feelings but they'll
recover quicker whereas the men won't be
so much in that emotional experience
they won't have that feelings of won't
allow those the hard feelings and then
they won't recover for years and years
and years
and so fascinating yeah so it's it's
that's what I'm talking about
yeah yeah
awesome
yeah was there anything else you'd like
to add yeah I
the thing that I would like to say is
that you know it doesn't matter what
kind of religion or
or philosophy like so many of them come
down to like love is like a cure and
love is the solution love is the way
there's so many things about that and
oftentimes what that gets translated to
in the mind is either like that's some
sort of fluffy
thought process that's not practical or
it's like oh love just means feeling
good and so feeling good is the way and
so like that's not very actionable this
is the action what I'm trying to
describe here is the action of love
it is
loving and learning to love in a way in
which it is not that it's in the pure
sense of love not in the Learned sense
of love and allowing ourselves to
Feel Love in a more and more pure sense
is
um something that actually frees us
incredibly deeply
and the way to do that is to look for
the ways that you are
managing others look for the things that
cause you fights look for the ways that
you are defending yourself
and when you find them see what kind of
heartbreak is required
so that you can get back to
unconditional love for the person see
what kind of
ways that you have to love that you
didn't think love was at all had
anything to do with right like love
might be leaving somebody love might be
being very brutally honest with somebody
love might be
um
you know
just playing with somebody there's lots
of things that love can
that you can love while you're doing
those things and
and that you don't think are true and as
you learned that then all of a sudden
love doesn't have to
be restricted by
fear or love doesn't have to be
constricted by like fear in itself can
be loved
and so so that's the path like I want to
just make that like super concrete so
it's it's not it's not just like okay
I'm gonna just be loving all the time
that doesn't work that's like that's
like attempted self-brainwash and it
doesn't work it's literally just
finding the ways that you defend and
feeling the Heartbreak that you need to
feel so that you can love
unconditionally and take care of
yourself
awesome thank you Joe you're welcome
thank you Brett pleasure as always
thank you everybody for listening take
care until next time yeah thanks
all right thank you all for listening if
you enjoyed this episode send it to
someone you think would like it we love
your feedback you can reach out to us on
Twitter at Art of a comp or on our
website at Art of accomplishment.com
which is also a great place to check out
our courses and coaching see you next
time
[Music]
thank you